# verified-riotboot

A formally verified bootloader for RIOT OS (arm version)


For more information, please referring to the paper "Verified functional programming of an IoT operating system's bootloader"

This repository contains the version of ARM/riotboot in F* presented in the MEMOCODE2021 submission #29.

# Organization

1. arm
   1. [arm_def.fst]: syntax + memory model
   2. [arm_semantics.fst]: semantics
   3. [valid.fst]: valid functions of each instruction 
   4. [properties.fst]: properties/lemmas of our arm model
   5. [jump_to_cpu]: the `cpu_jump_to_image` inplementation and verification.
2. riotboot
   1. [main.fst]: the kernel init module.
   2. [slot.fst]: the choose image module.
   3. [hdr.fst]: the header validaty implementation which will call the fletcher32 algorithm.
   4. [fletcher32.fst]: the fletcher32 implementation in LowStar.
   5. [riotboot.fst]: All common information of riotboot. i.e. the image header structure.
   6. [mymain.c]: A main file to tell the `makefile` to link it with all generated C code. Its executable file is `out/main`.
   7. [fletcher32.Tot.fst/hdr.Tot.fst/riotboot.Tot.fst/slot.Tot.fst]: proof-related files, where the functional correctness refers to `lemma_choose_image_validate` of `slot.Tot.fst`
   8. `/fletcher32inC`: a C variant of the fletcher32 algorithm, the [original version](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT/blob/master/sys/checksum/fletcher32.c) is from RIOT project. This file is used to generate the checksum of a given image header. 
   9. `/out`: this directory and its subdirectory is automatically generated by the `makefile`.
   10. `/out/sources`: all generated C code from LowStar files of `riotboot`.
   11. `/out1/sources`: the whole riotboot (+asm code) code.
3. sourceC: the source C code of riotboot from [RIOT project](https://github.com/RIOT-OS/RIOT).


# Running the code

## environment
We recommend using the [Everest script](https://github.com/project-everest/everest) to build the world.

1. Using `opam` to install the ocaml 4.09.1 (recommend using this version). Please refer to [install ocaml](https://ocaml.org/docs/install.html#OPAM)
   - be careful about your access permission when running the command.
   - restart your system after installing ocaml successfully.

2. Installing Z3, FStar and Kremlin from the `everest` project. Seeing [Everest website](https://project-everest.github.io/) and [LowStar user manual](https://fstarlang.github.io/lowstar/html/Setup.html#installing-the-tools) for more information.
```
git clone https://github.com/project-everest/everest
cd everest
./everest check 
# comment: set your path, `FSTAR_HOME` and `KREMLIN_HOME` in the `/etc/profile` file before run the next command. 
# Usually the everst script will add the z3 path to your `.bash_profile` automatically.
./everest pull FStar make kremlin make
```

3. (Option) Using `emacs` as IDE and the [fstar-mode](https://github.com/FStarLang/fstar-mode.el)
   - remember to add a library of the kremlin project to your `~/.emacs`
  ```
  (setq-default fstar-subp-prover-args '("--include" "YOUR-GITHUB-DICOREY/everest/kremlin/kremlib"))
  ```

## Verifying the FStar/LowStar project

1. Running the `fstar.exe your_fstar_or_lowstar_file.fst` to check each Fstar/Lowstar file

2. Or if you install the emacs `fstar-mode`, check the project in the emacs.

## Extracting the C code
In the `riotboot` directory, just run `make main` to generate 
  - `/out/sources` all C files and 
  - `/out` the executable file named `main`

To run the executable file, just use the command `./out/main` in the `riotboot` directory. The terminal will print:
```
Find the suitable image with start address(0d65552)
Please call the function `cpu_jump_to_image`
```
